---
layout: page
title:  "'Reg' McIntosh"
location: "French River Mouth"
arrived: 1903
departed: 1986
author: Reg McIntosh
---

John "Reg" McIntosh was born at French River Mouth in 1903 and was raised there, attending the local school. He worked for his father once he was old enough and continued until the late 1920s. After the First World War, he developed a strong interest in gasoline engines.  

Reg was the first person to conceive and construct a snow plane, or snow boat. His initial vehicle was a long toboggan fitted with a motorcycle engine and a homemade propeller at the rear. The first trip with this toboggan nearly ended in disaster when he encountered a short stretch of open water. Fortunately, he had built up enough speed to skip across it, but he considered himself very fortunate. From that moment, Reg resolved to build a machine capable of travelling over ice, snow, or water, realising that such a machine required a more powerful engine.  

In 1927, he ordered an aeroplane engine from his friends at Lorain Air Services, Ohio. The engine was a two-cycle Lawrence. He also procured metal and wood from Parry Sound, shipped by train. Within two weeks, he had constructed the first rudimentary snow plane, without a windshield, making for a very cold ride.  

The first people to witness Reg’s test run up the French River were Bud West and Lymon Everingham. They could hardly believe their eyes and feared he might be seriously injured in the unusual craft. Later, they, along with Ted King, worked with Reg to improve and build the plane. Several were constructed in the lower part of the bay.  

In the autumn of 1954, Reg sold one to John Lahti, who used it for transportation to Key Harbour from Highway 69.  

By this time, Reg had developed a strong interest in aeroplanes. He first completed an aeronautical correspondence course and then attended flight training at Lorain Airway Service, Ohio. On 11 November 1929, he received his diploma for the primary flying course.  

On 31 August 1931, Reg was awarded a certificate from the U.S. Aviation Institute and was presented with one of the first sets of gold wings as a Master Pilot—an honour he cherished throughout his life.  

After obtaining his licence, he barnstormed across numerous U.S. states during the summer. In the winter months, he returned home to the French River to trap furs.  

Reg built a hangar for his plane across the river, on the site now occupied by Thompson’s French River Resort.  

He recounted an incident one winter when, while taking off and reaching approximately 100 feet, a control cable to the elevators snapped, locking the rudder. His plane descended nose-first, crashing onto the thick ice. Reg suffered serious injuries, including broken ribs and a fractured collarbone, and the plane was heavily damaged. For years, X-ray images of his injuries were displayed on the windows of the Toonahville Trolley, as many travellers recalled.  

Reg married Mary Beatrice Heasman of Elmvale in August 1937. Mary had been a schoolteacher for several years near Parry Sound.  

Reg and Mary had two sons: John Lorne and Robert.  

John joined the Canadian Armed Forces (Navy) and is stationed at the Dartmouth base in Nova Scotia. He holds the rank of Chief Warrant Officer and has received numerous service medals. In March 1961, he married Margaret Fillmore of Advocate Harbour, Cumberland County, Nova Scotia. They have five daughters: Jacqueline Marie, Dawn Louise, Patricia Diana, Susan Fillmore, and Stephanie Evangeline, all of whom are actively involved in sports and community activities.  

Robert continues to reside in his parents’ home on French River Island and works locally during the summer months.  

Reg took over the operation of Gauthier’s Jitney Service in 1937, managing it until 1944.  

In September 1944, Reg and Mary returned to French River Mouth, purchasing the home formerly owned by his brother Robert “Pat” McIntosh. Reg also assumed operation of the family sawmill, running it until 1954, when he sold it to Edwin Aalto of Key Harbour. The mill remains in operation.  

Reg and Mary operated a marina, providing fuel and oil for boats travelling the bay and for local fishermen. Reg made numerous summer trips to the Harbour with his tugs to collect supplies. When the new Highway 69 crossed the Key in 1955, he was able to collect fuel and oil directly from the highway.  

During the years that Reg and Mary operated the marine service, they met and became friends with many people travelling Georgian Bay by boat, from the mid-1940s to the 1970s. One such friendship began when Dr Carrol and his party, travelling in Mr Hamilton's boat *Nandyjack*, stopped at the McIntosh dock for fuel in the 1940s. From this visit, a lifelong friendship developed. Another long-term friend who visited them annually was Dr Randolph Borron of Toronto. The doctor was born and raised at French River Mouth.  

Reg McIntosh spent the greater part of his life in the Upper Georgian Bay, French River Mouth area. As Reg and Mary’s health declined, they left their home on Macdougal Bay after many years and moved to Belvedere Heights in Parry Sound.  

A familiar sight for many years around Key Harbour and the River were the McIntosh tugs, owned by Reg. The first was a tug called *Harold G*, followed by the last, *Effie M*, which was built in Goderich. John Lahti owned the tug prior to Reg purchasing it.  

Reg McIntosh was always an inventive and resourceful person, a necessity for living and surviving at the French River during severe winters when the area was isolated for months.

Reg passed away in Parry Sound in 1986, at the age of 82. Mary passed away in  1990, at the age of 80. They are both buried in Sylvan Acres Cemetery Waubamik, near Parry Sound.